README.md, before:

# DNCS-LAB Assignment A.Y. 2018-2019

Project by Riccardo Ricci and Sergio Povoli for Design of Networks and Communication System hosted by UniTN

## Table of contents
* [Requirements](#requirements)
* [Network Map](#network-map)
* [Our approach to project](#our-approach-to-project)  
  * [Subnetting](#subnetting)  
  * [Ip address assignment](#ip-address-assignment)
  * [Virtual Lans](#virtual-lans)


# Requirements
 - 10GB disk storage
 - 2GB free RAM
 - Virtualbox
 - Vagrant (https://www.vagrantup.com)
 - Internet

# Network Map


        +----------------------------------------------------------------+
        |                                    192.168.251.1/30            |
        |                                        ^     192.168.251.2/30  |
        |                                        |        ^              |eth0
        +--+--+                   +------------+ |        |  +------------+
        |     |                   |            | |        |  |            |
        |     |               eth0|            |eth2     eth2|            |
        |     +-------------------+  router-1  +-------------+  router-2  |
        |     |                   |            |             |            |
        |     |                   |            |             |            |
        |  M  |                   +------------+             +------------+
        |  A  |                         |eth1                   eth1| 192.168.252.1/30
        |  N  |       192.168.249.1/24  |  eth1.11                  |
        |  A  |       192.168.250.1/27  |  eth1.12                  | 192.168.252.2/30
        |  G  |                         |                     +-----+----+
        |  E  |                         |eth1                 |          |
        |  M  |               +-------------------+           |          |
        |  E  |           eth0|      TRUNK        |           | host-2-c |
        |  N  +---------------+      SWITCH       |           |          |
        |  T  |               | 11             12 |           |          |
        |     |               +-------------------+           +----------+
        |  V  |                  |eth2         |eth3                |eth0
        |  A  |                  |             |                    |
        |  G  |                  |             |                    |
        |  R  | 192.168.249.2/24 |eth1     eth1| 192.168.250.2/27   |
        |  A  |           +----------+     +----------+             |
        |  N  |           |          |     |          |             |
        |  T  |       eth0|          |     |          |             |
        |     +-----------+ host-1-a |     | host-1-b |             |
        |     |           |          |     |          |             |
        |     |           |          |     |          |             |
        ++-+--+           +----------+     +----------+             |
        | |                                 |eth0                   |
        | |                                 |                       | 
        | +---------------------------------+                       |
        |                                                           |
        |                                                           |
        +-----------------------------------------------------------+

# Our approach to project

## Subnetting
We decided to split our network in 4 subnetworks, 2 of these are Vlan based.  
The 4 networks are:  
-**A** The area that contains host-1-a and all the similar hosts in this subnet and the router-1 port. This is Vlan based.  
-**B** The area that contains host-1-b and all the similar hosts in this subnet and the router-1 port. This is Vlan based.  
-**C** The area that contains host-2-c and the router-2 port.  
-**D** The area that contains other router-1 port and other router-2 port.

## Ip address assignment
In this assignment our aim was to follow this requirement:  
- Up to 130 hosts in the same subnet of host-1-a  
- Up to 25 hosts in the same subnet of host-1-b  
- Consume as few IP addresses as possible  
For this reason we decided to assign this ip subnets:

| Network |     Network Mask      | Available IPs |
|:-------:|:---------------------:|:-------------:|
|   **A** |   192.168.249.0/24    | (2^8)-2 = 254 |
|   **B** |   192.168.250.0/27    | (2^5)-2 = 30  |
|   **C** |   192.168.252.0/30    | (2^2)-2 = 2   |
|   **D** |   192.168.251.0/30    | (2^2)-2 = 2   |  

We calculated the available number [*N*] with this formula **((2^M)-2)**.  
Where:
- *N* is the available IPs  
- *M* is the bit dedicated to the host part [e.g. for the Network **A** id 32-24=8]. M belongs to Natural number.
- *-2* is the the unavailable ip in any network. In fact every subnet has 2 dedicate ip, one for broadcast and one for network.  

Whit this formula we decided all the subnets so that *N* is as close as possible to the requested ip number.

## Virtual Lans
We decided to use vlans for the networks A and B. In fact, networks A and B are, hypotetically, on the same broadcast area. Using vlans we can split this area in two virtual subnets without adding any router. We decide to proceed like this because in the assignement, either the virtual subnet containing host-1-a and the one containing host-1-b must be able to reach a webserver located on host-2-c and retrieve a simple web page. 
We setup the switch interface linked to the router in trunk mode, in order to simultaneously manage the traffic coming from 2 distinct vlans on the same iterface. 

# How-to
 - Install Virtualbox and Vagrant
 - Clone this repository
`git clone https://github.com/dustnic/dncs-lab`
 - You should be able to launch the lab from within the cloned repo folder.
```
cd dncs-lab
[~/dncs-lab] vagrant up
```
Once you launch the vagrant script, it may take a while for the entire topology to become available.
 - Verify the status of the 4 VMs
 ```
 [dncs-lab]$ vagrant status                                                                                                                                                                
Current machine states:

router                    running (virtualbox)
switch                    running (virtualbox)
host-a                    running (virtualbox)
host-b                    running (virtualbox)
```
- Once all the VMs are running verify you can log into all of them:
`vagrant ssh router`
`vagrant ssh switch`
`vagrant ssh host-a`
`vagrant ssh host-b`

Commit message:

Test Table .md in Vlan paragraph

README.md, after:

# DNCS-LAB Assignment A.Y. 2018-2019

Project by Riccardo Ricci and Sergio Povoli for Design of Networks and Communication System hosted by UniTN

## Table of contents
* [Requirements](#requirements)
* [Network Map](#network-map)
* [Our approach to project](#our-approach-to-project)  
  * [Subnetting](#subnetting)  
  * [Ip address assignment](#ip-address-assignment)
  * [Virtual Lans](#virtual-lans)


# Requirements
 - 10GB disk storage
 - 2GB free RAM
 - Virtualbox
 - Vagrant (https://www.vagrantup.com)
 - Internet

# Network Map


        +----------------------------------------------------------------+
        |                                    192.168.251.1/30            |
        |                                        ^     192.168.251.2/30  |
        |                                        |        ^              |eth0
        +--+--+                   +------------+ |        |  +------------+
        |     |                   |            | |        |  |            |
        |     |               eth0|            |eth2     eth2|            |
        |     +-------------------+  router-1  +-------------+  router-2  |
        |     |                   |            |             |            |
        |     |                   |            |             |            |
        |  M  |                   +------------+             +------------+
        |  A  |                         |eth1                   eth1| 192.168.252.1/30
        |  N  |       192.168.249.1/24  |  eth1.11                  |
        |  A  |       192.168.250.1/27  |  eth1.12                  | 192.168.252.2/30
        |  G  |                         |                     +-----+----+
        |  E  |                         |eth1                 |          |
        |  M  |               +-------------------+           |          |
        |  E  |           eth0|    TRUNK PORT     |           | host-2-c |
        |  N  +---------------+      SWITCH       |           |          |
        |  T  |               | 11             12 |           |          |
        |     |               +-------------------+           +----------+
        |  V  |                  |eth2         |eth3                |eth0
        |  A  |                  |             |                    |
        |  G  |                  |             |                    |
        |  R  | 192.168.249.2/24 |eth1     eth1| 192.168.250.2/27   |
        |  A  |           +----------+     +----------+             |
        |  N  |           |          |     |          |             |
        |  T  |       eth0|          |     |          |             |
        |     +-----------+ host-1-a |     | host-1-b |             |
        |     |           |          |     |          |             |
        |     |           |          |     |          |             |
        ++-+--+           +----------+     +----------+             |
        | |                                 |eth0                   |
        | |                                 |                       | 
        | +---------------------------------+                       |
        |                                                           |
        |                                                           |
        +-----------------------------------------------------------+

# Our approach to project

## Subnetting
We decided to split our network in 4 subnetworks, 2 of these are Vlan based.  
The 4 networks are:  
-**A** The area that contains host-1-a and all the similar hosts in this subnet and the router-1 port. This is Vlan based.  
-**B** The area that contains host-1-b and all the similar hosts in this subnet and the router-1 port. This is Vlan based.  
-**C** The area that contains host-2-c and the router-2 port.  
-**D** The area that contains other router-1 port and other router-2 port.

## Ip address assignment
In this assignment our aim was to follow this requirement:  
- Up to 130 hosts in the same subnet of host-1-a  
- Up to 25 hosts in the same subnet of host-1-b  
- Consume as few IP addresses as possible  
For this reason we decided to assign this ip subnets:

| Network |     Network Mask      | Available IPs |
|:-------:|:---------------------:|:-------------:|
|   **A** |   192.168.249.0/24    | (2^8)-2 = 254 |
|   **B** |   192.168.250.0/27    | (2^5)-2 = 30  |
|   **C** |   192.168.252.0/30    | (2^2)-2 = 2   |
|   **D** |   192.168.251.0/30    | (2^2)-2 = 2   |  

We calculated the available number [*N*] with this formula **((2^M)-2)**.  
Where:
- *N* is the available IPs  
- *M* is the bit dedicated to the host part [e.g. for the Network **A** id 32-24=8]. M belongs to Natural number.
- *-2* is the the unavailable ip in any network. In fact every subnet has 2 dedicate ip, one for broadcast and one for network.  

Whit this formula we decided all the subnets so that *N* is as close as possible to the requested ip number.

## Virtual Lans
We decided to use vlans for the networks A and B. In fact, networks A and B are, hypotetically, on the same broadcast area. Using vlans we can split this area in two virtual subnets without adding any router. We decide to proceed like this because in the assignement, either the virtual subnet containing host-1-a and the one containing host-1-b must be able to reach a webserver located on host-2-c and retrieve a simple web page. 
We setup the switch interface linked to the router in trunk mode, in order to simultaneously manage the traffic coming from 2 distinct vlans on the same iterface. 
| Network | VLan ID |
|---------|---------|
| **A**   | 11      |
| **B**   | 12      |  
Now the Interface of the **A** Network is:  
| Interface | Host       | Vlan Tag | IP            |
|-----------|------------|----------|---------------|
| eth1.11   | 'router-1' | 11       | 192.168.249.1 |
| eth1      | 'host-1-a' | None     | 192.168.249.2 |  
Now the Interface of the **B** Network is:  
| Interface | Host       | Vlan Tag | IP            |
|-----------|------------|----------|---------------|
| eth1.12   | 'router-1' | 12       | 192.168.250.1 |
| eth1      | 'host-1-b' | None     | 192.168.250.2 |


# How-to
 - Install Virtualbox and Vagrant
 - Clone this repository
`git clone https://github.com/dustnic/dncs-lab`
 - You should be able to launch the lab from within the cloned repo folder.
```
cd dncs-lab
[~/dncs-lab] vagrant up
```
Once you launch the vagrant script, it may take a while for the entire topology to become available.
 - Verify the status of the 4 VMs
 ```
 [dncs-lab]$ vagrant status                                                                                                                                                                
Current machine states:

router                    running (virtualbox)
switch                    running (virtualbox)
host-a                    running (virtualbox)
host-b                    running (virtualbox)
```
- Once all the VMs are running verify you can log into all of them:
`vagrant ssh router`
`vagrant ssh switch`
`vagrant ssh host-a`
`vagrant ssh host-b`
